# BIOMD0000000235: Kuhn2009_EndoMesodermNetwork

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000235.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000235.git@20140916`

## Usage

Importing the model package.

`import BIOMD0000000235 as model`

Get the SBML string from the model

`print model.sbmlString`

If [python-libsbml](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/python-libsbml) bindings are
installed, the libsbml.SBMLDocument object is also accessible

`model.sbml`


# Model Notes


This a model from the article:  
** Monte Carlo analysis of an ODE Model of the Sea Urchin Endomesoderm Network. **   
Kühn C, Wierling C, Kühn A, Klipp E, Panopoulou G, Lehrach H, Poustka AJ. _BMC
Syst Biol._2009 Aug 23;3:83.
[19698179](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19698179),  
**Abstract:**   
BACKGROUND: Gene Regulatory Networks (GRNs) control the differentiation,
specification and function of cells at the genomic level. The levels of
interactions within large GRNs are of enormous depth and complexity. Details
about many GRNs are emerging, but in most cases it is unknown to what extent
they control a given process, i.e. the grade of completeness is uncertain.
This uncertainty stems from limited experimental data, which is the main
bottleneck for creating detailed dynamical models of cellular processes.
Parameter estimation for each node is often infeasible for very large GRNs. We
propose a method, based on random parameter estimations through Monte-Carlo
simulations to measure completeness grades of GRNs. RESULTS: We developed a
heuristic to assess the completeness of large GRNs, using ODE simulations
under different conditions and randomly sampled parameter sets to detect
parameter-invariant effects of perturbations. To test this heuristic, we
constructed the first ODE model of the whole sea urchin endomesoderm GRN, one
of the best studied large GRNs. We find that nearly 48% of the parameter-
invariant effects correspond with experimental data, which is 65% of the
expected optimal agreement obtained from a submodel for which kinetic
parameters were estimated and used for simulations. Randomized versions of the
model reproduce only 23.5% of the experimental data. CONCLUSION: The method
described in this paper enables an evaluation of network topologies of GRNs
without requiring any parameter values. The benefit of this method is
exemplified in the first mathematical analysis of the complete Endomesoderm
Network Model. The predictions we provide deliver candidate nodes in the
network that are likely to be erroneous or miss unknown connections, which may
need additional experiments to improve the network topology. This mathematical
model can serve as a scaffold for detailed and more realistic models. We
propose that our method can be used to assess a completeness grade of any GRN.
This could be especially useful for GRNs involved in human diseases, where
often the amount of connectivity is unknown and/or many genes/interactions are
missing.

The paper describes several models, Mi, i=1...n, where M0 correspond to the
unperturbed model and all the others correspond to the perturbed model. This
model is the unperturbed model. The model reproduces figure 5 of the reference
publication. The figures were generated by running 1 simulation, whereas in
the paper the plotted values are the means of 800 simulations using randomly
samples parameter sets. Additional information from the Author: The parameter
that were randomly samples are the transcription parameters c_Proteins... and
k_Proteins. The parameter were sampled from a lognormal distribution with
sigma = 1.5 and mu = 0.5

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models. It is copyright (c) 2005-2010 The BioModels Team.  
For more information see the [terms of
use](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/legal.html).  
To cite BioModels Database, please use [Le Novère N., Bornstein B., Broicher
A., Courtot M., Donizelli M., Dharuri H., Li L., Sauro H., Schilstra M.,
Shapiro B., Snoep J.L., Hucka M. (2006) BioModels Database: A Free,
Centralized Database of Curated, Published, Quantitative Kinetic Models of
Biochemical and Cellular Systems Nucleic Acids Res., 34: D689-D691.](http://ww
w.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?tool=pubmed&pubmedid=16381960)


